Dr. Mackin, tell us something about your early
life, including the names of your parents, the
dates and places of their birth if you remember
them, the date and place of your birth, the schools
you attended up to the time you entered college,
whatever you can remember of your childhood life.
I was born in 1903 at Waxahachie, Texas, close to
Dallas.
My mother was Willie Ina Hall Mackin and my father
Alfred Cecil Mackin Sr.
My father died in my early childhood
in about 1912.
He was a pianist and band director for the Village
Band in Waxahachie and he was also,
pretty interesting, character in that he played
the piano for the old silent movies. You've heard
of this. This is one of my earliest remembrances in
childhood. I was listening to my father in the
local theater playing for the Perils of Pauline or
whatever it was.
I remember my father mostly for his piano.
playing, which has led me over the years to collect
most of the world's records in piano music. I have a
big collection there. My mother...
Incidentally, my father was born in Illinois. at
the town of Gilman, just below Chicago, and he was
one of the railroad Irish immigrants. Of course,
we believe that he descended from Brian Beru, as
usual with Irishmen. How close that is to the
truth, I don't have any idea, you understand. When
my father died, we were... Of course, pretty
destitute, pretty close to destitute. My mother
became a schoolteacher. We moved to Oklahoma,
settled at Ada, excuse me, at Durant, Oklahoma
first,
and my mother taught for a while after going to the
local teacher's college and getting all the
requirements off,
she was there in the public schools for almost
several years. After that, she went to East
Central State College at Ada, Oklahoma, and was a
critic teacher first in the model school, later
professor of English, finally ended up as dean of
women, so I got my academic side through my mother.
To come back And to myself and my own schooling, I
had some schooling at Waxahachie, I think up to
about fourth grade or somewhere, fourth or fifth,
I'm not sure of that.
And then some more of it in public schools and into
the high school at Durant, Oklahoma. I remember
that I was in high school at the time the U.S.
entered World War II. One,
excuse me. That's 1917, I believe. I went from
there to the college, a two-year college,
Southeastern State College now in Oklahoma.
Was there a year or something like that that I
followed my mother to to Ada. She had already left
before I left the college there. I was actually
working in the high school division of the
college. At that time, there were two years high
school, two years college, and I was still working
in the high school area at about that time. And was
that East Central State? Was it Ada? Yes, East
Central State College at Ada.
At that time, I had started into majoring in
biology, by the way, at Southeastern in Durand,
but when I moved to Ada, I found no satisfactory
teacher there, so I shifted to industrial arts.
Played football and tennis. This was the biggest
part of my college career there.
19 and 22, prior to the time I graduated from
college, I took my first teaching job at
Tishomingo, Oklahoma. Believe it or not, at 19
years old, I was principal of the high school,
coach of athletics, taught all the industrial
arts and whatever else was left over, including
artistry. That's how I got introduced to
teaching. It was quite a teaching load. It was
quite a teaching load. How big a school was that? A
small town, Tishomingo,
Oklahoma, not very far from College of Eden. I
spent that year, 22, 23, teaching there.
Then you interrupted your college education for a
year. Yes, I interrupted my college education for
a year and
then went back and swore I'd never teach another
day. I got back to East Central College and the
president offered me a student job, a half-time
job. I got my bachelor's degree there in
industrial arts and biology in 1924. That's kind
of an odd combination, isn't it? No, it fits very
well. I'm still with both of them. Well, I
shouldn't say odd. I guess maybe what I would
change that to. Well, unusual also sounds odd. But
I mean, I would say not very many people would put
together biology and industrial arts, I would
say. I'm not sure that I did it intentionally. I
think it was just simply a matter of taking
advantage of whatever opportunities came along.
to get what I wanted. From what you said earlier, I
would guess that biology was your first love.
Biology was the first love, but I lost that
teacher. But when I came back after teaching a year
at Tishomingo, I found an excellent biology
teacher had been hired by the college. And, of
course, I went right back to
the biology end of it. but I carried the other also
because I did like it. I didn't like the teaching. I
didn't like the industrial arts teaching,
but I did like the biology. One matter to back up
just a little bit on your mother. Was she a native
Texan? Yes, her people were farmers. I know very
little about them. I never met my grandparents.
but my mother was adopted by a Waxahachie family
and I knew this family and thought of her adopted
parents as uncle and aunt. He happened to be the
sheriff of Ellis County at that time and was a top
man, lived in a big Victorian house,
a real beautiful place.
So that was her upbringing.
Her family Her mother and her father, I never knew
because they died early apparently. She was
adopted by this, the Ryburn family, Jim Ryburn
was the name. You mentioned earlier that your last
year of college you were doing some part-time
teaching in the college. Yes, it was an industrial
arts and not in the college but in the model school
attached to the college. I had charge of the little
rough ends and all of it.
Was the model school for a full eleven years or
twelve years, however many years they had in a
public school? Yes, it had at least two years of
high school in it, and I was teaching high school
grade students at that time.
Then you stayed on at the Central State for a good
long while, didn't you? Yes. After I graduated, I
was offered a job to teach biology and I became a
full-time biology teacher first year of the
graduate. This was in, let's see, I got my
bachelor's degree in 1924. I taught the next year
24, 25 and 26, 27. The
following year I took leave of absence, went to the
University of Illinois to study biology under
Henry Baldwin Ward at Illinois. It's the same man
Under him, Dr.
Hopkins worked. Did you choose Illinois because
of Dr. Ward? Yes, specifically because that was an
area that I was interested in. I chose, I chose him
rather than the institution. What was his area,
you mean because of the area of biology he was in?
Yes, he was one of the famous parasitologists of
the nation in those early days.
So I went to the University of Illinois.
I worked out a master's degree and eight hours of
undergraduate work that the dean fined me in nine
months and got a master's degree in So that was a
pretty busy year for you, I would imagine. Nine
months to take some undergraduate courses, plus
enough for a master's. The only thing that
bothered me was this undergraduate work. It was
all in German.
Henry Baldwin was a product of the Prussian school
of of teachers, and he was a driver. And
he said, well, if you're going to have to take
undergraduate work, do something that'll do you
some good. So he made me take German, which was
about as rough as you would have picked. It's
pretty rough, yes. I remember from the smattering
of German I've had. Did you then, after you
received your master's, went back to Ada? I
returned to Ada and taught in the college. At the
time, I think I was an assistant professor. In
a couple of years, I was full professor. I went back
to the University of Illinois at Dr. Ward's
invitation. He gave me an assistantship. in 1929,
just in time for the stock crash,
which helped me a great deal because I'd saved some
money. I mean, this money turned out to be twice as
much under the Depression days as it would have
been before. So,
to me, the Depression was Just an episode that
actually was a help in getting through.
I was there at Illinois working on my doctorate and
took some marine work at the University of
Washington Seattle in the summer and got my PhD in
1933.
Was that working under Dr. Ward? Working under Dr.
Ward. I never found the course work difficult. In
fact, I don't think I made one B in all of the
biological science that I took. The main reason
was that
In some areas, I was considerably better than my
teachers because I'd had more field experience. I
admitted to the state of my boyhood, I spent mostly
in the woods and fields and so on. That was the thing
that I did.
Especially when we were still back at Durant, we
were I spent
nearly all of my time in the woods, and I knew a great
deal about it. Whether I had much reading there, I
don't know. When I went to the University of
Illinois, I found most of the courses were fairly
simple. I didn't have much trouble. Teaching at,
in Ada, in East Central State, did you have to teach
in the summers most of the time too? Yes, I taught
the entire year. So you didn't have any summers off
for research or anything like that? No, but I did.
You understand that at that time, research was not
looked upon with favor. I did my research on my own,
paid for it all, and I took trips every August. I had
a vacation in August after the summer term had been
closed. And I arranged over a good portion of the
United States during those summer periods. I was
doing research back there at a time when the
administration of the college just assumed I
didn't do it.
How many hours of teaching load did you carry
during the time? I imagine it varied from time to
time between 24 and 42, but just for some idea of
perspective, I have some idea of how many. what
your load was? Well, it was at least twice to three
times what I have here.
Anyway, there was no time given off for anything
except when I taught a course in biology, it was
usually a five-hour course. There would be four
laboratory hours a week and three lecture hours a
week and I would teach at least two courses at a time
and sometimes three.
You probably had to change your own labs too, I
think. Oh yeah, I did all of the laboratory work,
getting out specimens and everything of that
kind. No such thing as an assistant.
I didn't mind that. I would rather do it. I know that
you left the school at 842 during the war. Was that,
was it because of the war that you left or? Yeah
sometime in the 30s, late 30s,
the president called me in and he says you're our
new ground school instructor.
I said, what do you mean, ground school
instructor? He says, the
flying school that we have here for students.
You'll remember that before World War II, the
country was engaged in developing as many pilots
as we could. and the government subsidized nearly
every school in the United States, I guess, to
teach people how to fly, students how to fly.
I've forgotten the name of that program, the
Civilian Pilot Training Program. That's the name
of it. And I didn't know a thing about it, of course.
He called me in, but he said that I was it because the
man that we had had accepted a job with the
government and would no longer be available. I
argued that I didn't know anything about it. How
could I do it? He said, you go do it. So I did. I bought
me a bunch of books and
boned up on them and went up to Oklahoma City and
took examinations
and all of the ground school subjects that they
needed, which was Meteorology and aircraft,
parachutes, navigation,
aircraft engines.
I believe that's all. No, civil air regulations.
These are the things I had to have in order to teach.
So I started teaching and keeping ahead of my
students.
So I had all of these, I had a teacher's license.
When World War II broke out, I was licensed for all
of those. Not only that, by that time I was a pilot on
my own and had a civilian pilot license and owned my
own airplane. So when World War II broke out, the
Navy sent me a telegram asking me to help with the
war effort, so I did. Simple as that. I taught
navigation most of it.
I believe you taught that in both Norman in
Oklahoma and in Dallas. Yes, Dallas Naval Air
Station. That's just west of Dallas, actually, at
Grand Prairie. And then later they moved me up to
Oklahoma at Norman.
This I liked because I knew most of the people at the
University of Oklahoma at Norman, and I set up a
liaison with them. By the time I got up there, I was
hankering to get back to biology. Well, they gave
me a research room on the campus and all the
microscopes and whatever I wanted to do a little
research on the site. And that's what I did. No
official connections or anything, but I worked
with them. After that, somewhere I believe in
1944,
we got to the place where we had enough Navy
instructors standing around doing nothing that I
felt like I could turn the job over to somebody else
and go back to biology. Dr. Weiss at that time Dean
of the Graduate School at Norman, University of
Oklahoma, called me one day and said he had a
research job
for me. He said, I want to take it. So I went to see him
and it happened to be a job with the College of
William & Mary and the Virginia Fisheries.
department. These two were working together and
running a laboratory at Yorktown.
The job was a study of the rib muscles on the seaside
of Virginia.
The man who had been doing this job, Dr. Moore, got a
job at New Hampshire, I believe. and I took his
place to finish up a project that had already
begun. Is this Ribbed Muscle? Ribbed,
R-I-B-B-E-D, Ribbed Muscle Modulus Domicilis.
It's a very common one all around the country. He
might be interested in what they were doing with
these things. During World War II, We lost our
source of chicken feed and vitamins, especially
fortified chicken feed. The Delmarva Peninsula,
that's their big business, still is today, is
raising chickens. But they got all of their
vitamins from the Japs. Of course, we weren't
speaking to the Japs at about that time. So they
were looking for another source and they found it
in these mussels. And the efforts were to culture
this mussel in sufficient quantities to fill this
need.
In other words, I was still in the war effort to some
extent, but actually working for the College of
William & Mary, supported by Dow Chemical
Company. Were you successful in cultivating the
mussels? No, we never did figure out a way to
culture the mussels or to speed up their
development at all.
That was being done by then with oysters, wasn't
it? Or has that been a more recent development? The
oysters, I don't think oysters have ever been used
for vitamins. What I mean, what I think commonly
called oyster farming, were they not doing that
with oysters? Oh, farming oysters, yes. When I
finished this project, which took me only through
that first letter about nine months,
I joined the...
the College of William & Mary and the Virginia
Fisher's Laboratory in the capacity of Director
of Oyster Research. In other words, I just moved
from Waxapraga on the seaside over to Yorktown and
continued working with them for about another
year. in the oyster culture area. This is where I
was introduced to oysters, but all these mussels
and the oyster reefs were all together. That year,
with the mussels study, I lived in an old house
right out on the edge of the water, and clear out of
sight of everything. And I spent the entire winter
in the field. That's all I did. I hardly ever inside
at all. What spurred on my original question was I
was wondering, maybe I'm mistaken in equating,
not truly equating, but almost equating the
technique that you would use with an oyster as
opposed to one with a mussel. And I was wondering
why oysters could be cultivated and not mussels.
They have, I think, possibly the same problems,
the disease problem, I think, as far as the muscles
are concerned, but I don't know that because I
never did actually get to study the muscles so far
as their diseases were concerned. I didn't study
the oysters either as long as I was at... at the
Virginia Fisher's Laboratory, studying culture
methods using the time-honored methods actually
built up by the oyster, more than anything else,
and attempting to improve on their methods.
so I got my introduction anyway to oyster biology
and oyster culture methods at the College of
William & Mary.